Good afternoon.
Welcome to our session today,
Scientific Computing
Clusters on Mac OS X.
My name is Todd Dailey.
I'm a consulting engineer on the
business side of Apple and we've got
a few other presenters for you today.
We've got Warner Yuen who's a consulting
engineer on the education side,
Yuusuf Abdulghani who's a performance
architect both doing their benchmarks
and working on the performance tools,
and Josh Durham who's a technical
services consultant who's been
involved in the Virginia Tech Cluster.
We'll have a couple other
people coming up for Q&A later.
I'll introduce them to you then.
But what we're going to do today is
we're going to work up the stack of
high performance computing cluster
and show you everything that you need,
give you an update on
all the different pieces.
Obviously we've done
some updates this week.
We've introduced a great new server.
We've introduced some other great
new tools and we've got some
great stuff coming in Leopard.
So we'll kind of use this as an
architecture to work through and show
you everything that's going on currently.
We'll kind of use this as an
architecture to work through and show
you everything that's going on currently.
with clusters and how you can use that.
So the first thing we want to do is
give you an update on Apple deployments
and talk about what we've done lately,
what people have been doing with our
XServe G5 products and expanding those
and how they've used those today in
deployments that they're using for
real science for real purposes today.
One of those that we've recently
done is the Mayo Clinic and the,
oh I'm sorry, let me step back.
One of those that, so why would you use
Apple for scientific clusters?
There's a lot of tools that
are built in there that are
useful to you that you might,
that provide a lot of benefits
to you for clusters today.
Obviously we've got Mac OS X Server,
a powerful Unix based and Leopard Unix
operating system that provides you with
a lot of tools that are built in there.
We've got all the built
in tools like Python,
like Ruby coming up in Leopard tools
like Ruby on Rails that are all
just built in ready for you to use.
We've got Xgrid which
we've done some updates to.
We've got the XServe G5,
which we've done some updates to.
which we've done some updates
to with Xgrid 2 for Leopard.
We've got the XServe G5,
which we've done some updates
to with Xgrid 2 for Leopard.
But it's a great easy to use clustering
tool that allows you to run jobs.
Josh will be showing you a
demo later of how that works.
We've got all the great tools
in Xcode 2.4 and Yusuf will
be showing you some of that.
And it's a popular and a well understood
platform within the science community.
And that's a very important point.
If you go down to the Apple and
Science Lab downstairs,
you can see all of the different
applications that are built in there.
You can see all of the different
applications that people
are using our platform for.
You can see the hyper wall,
the big multi-monitor wall
that people are using.
Just amazing innovations
going on on the platform.
So one of those people that's
using our cluster and expanding
that today is the Mayo Clinic.
The Mayo Clinic is doing
molecular modeling.
They're developing drug therapies.
So they're doing kind of
theoretical therapies trying to
figure out if a drug could work,
for example, as a cure for cancer.
And this is very complicated.
They have a 295 XServe
cluster that's running.
This replaced an old Xeon
cluster that they had.
And with that,
they were able to reduce the time to
run one of their models through from
27 minutes down to just five minutes.
So a lot of benefits for them
immediately with the XServe G5
by being able to deploy that.
Another customer that I'm
sure you've heard of is Colsa.
And we'll have Eric Wages who is
involved in running that cluster
up to talk to you later on the Q&A.
So Colsa provides computational
resources basically under contract
to whoever would like to have
their cluster housed with them.
They're number 21 currently
on the supercomputing top 500.
They've got 1,536 of our
cluster nodes deployed today.
And some things that they've done,
you've probably heard
about their cluster before.
But some things that they've
done since last year,
they've upgraded the cluster from
gigabit Ethernet on the cluster.
From Ethernet on the
backbone to mirror net.
This provides them with a lot more speed.
Warner will be showing you later
some benchmarks that show that.
They've got XSAN deployed now.
They've got 41 XSAN clients
going back to XServe RAID.
And they use this cluster
to do missile research.
So they do a lot of research
about hypersonic missiles.
And to do that, they use something called
computational flow dynamics.
A very complicated way of
modeling that to basically see
theoretically where things are going.
So it's a very productive
cluster for them.
And we've got some other
customers out there that have
very large clusters as well.
So besides Colsa up there on the top,
you can see as we go down,
we've got some other big clusters
that are already out there.
We've got Virginia Tech with 1,100 nodes.
We've got UIUC with 512.
We've got UCLA with 256.
Bowie State with 224.
And we've got hundreds of deployments
that are out there that are still going.
And we've got a lot of other clusters
out there that are smaller than that.
And those people in many cases are
using our prebuilt configurations that
we saw as the Apple Workgroup cluster.
And so we've got a lot of 8, 16, 32,
64 node clusters out there.
A lot of those in education where
people are using these for educational
or departmental or teaching purposes
to be able to take their cluster and
do research on a departmental level.
In many cases, in addition to larger
clusters that they might have.
You can get into one of these Workgroup
clusters pretty inexpensively.
So we see a lot of departments that
buy them just because it's within
their discretionary budget to do so.
And they can have their own cluster
to play with versus having to
compete for resources on a campus
or on an entire enterprise level.
You can get this prebuilt.
Well,
you can get this with qualified for many
other applications that are out there.
We qualify that with MATLAB.
We qualify it with Grid Mathematica.
We qualify it with
Inquiry from the Bio team,
which does bioinformatics.
And it's also a great platform
for just open source code.
There's hundreds of open source
projects that are out there that
just compile and run just fine.
Clustered code projects that
just run fine on our clusters.
So talking about the HPC stack
itself and starting to work up that,
we're going to start at the bottom and
start looking at the hardware platform.
Obviously you've got to have some
servers before you can start building
the interconnects and building the
applications to run on top of that.
So to start with servers,
we've got a great new server to
talk about at this conference.
You won't be able to get it for a little
while but it's still a great platform
and we're really excited about the,
now the rechristened XServe and the quad
Xeon processor capabilities that it has.
This thing is just a computing monster.
You've got four Xeon
cores that are in there.
You've got an immense
cache on the processor.
You've got very fast hard drive
options that you have on that.
You've got an immense RAM capability.
If you haven't seen the new XServe yet,
many of you may not know,
we've got those down in
the IT lab downstairs.
If you do want to see that,
that lab closes today at 5.
But if you want to see one up close,
there's,
I know there's a few around different
places but the IT lab is one place
that you can go and see it today.
So this is just a fantastic product.
We've got the server out on
Intel now so that you can see that.
And on top of that of course you've
got to run an operating system.
With the XServe Intel announcement we
also announced Mac OS X Server running
on Intel 1047 that's available today.
Although the server is not going to
be available for a little while yet.
But that's got a 64-bit memory
address space for command line
apps for compiled Unix apps.
It's got just announced Xcode 2.4.
Yuusuf will talk about some of the tools
and some of the updates that we've done
in that for performance optimization.
And that can act as an Xgrid controller.
So again you can right out of the bat
with that control up to 128 nodes without
going to any job managers or any of the
things that Josh is going to show you.
And then in Leopard Server the
story gets even better.
In Leopard Server we've extended
the 64-bitness from the command
line all the way up the stack.
Now that may not seem to be too
important for a cluster job,
a lot of that stuff operates
at the command line.
But we expect that some of
our partners out there who
make tools for small clusters,
it's very conceivable that you
could have GUI applications that
might need 64-bit access to memory,
to large amounts of memory.
And we've got a huge memory capacity
as you know on the new XServe.
So you can access all of that memory when
Leopard comes out from any application
that you can build with Xcode.
We'll have Xcode 3,
we'll have the Xgrid 2 controller.
There's a session tomorrow on Xgrid 2 if
you want to learn some more about that.
And one important feature that we
haven't talked about much at the
conference is that Leopard Server will
be conformant with the UNIX spec.
So we've always said that
Mac OS X is UNIX based.
But now we can say with
Leopard that OS X is UNIX.
It conforms with the POSIX specs,
it's been certified.
It'll be an actual UNIX platform.
And so the code will be much
more compatible with any sort of
random UNIX code that you want to
throw on the machine and compile.
And we've also added a DTrace
facility within Leopard Server now.
So there's other sessions on that
this week and you can see about that.
But that provides you with a very
low-level debugging function.
And so with that intro,
I'm going to hand things over to Warner.
And Warner's going to talk
about the interconnection.
Thanks.
Thanks Todd.
I'm Warner Yuen.
I'm a consulting engineer with
the education division of Apple.
And I'm going to be talking
about interconnects.
Oops, wrong way.
And what are high
performance interconnects?
So these are specialized interconnects
that don't use the TCP/IP stack but
instead the data flows directly from
the network to the memory on the
computer and that way the processors
don't actually have to wait for
the data in order to act upon it.
And also these interconnects have
a high bandwidth capability so it's
not just having the data flow fast
to the processors but also you can
flow lots of data to the processors.
In general these are external
interface cards and the link is
either copper or fiber optic and
they are connected to purpose built
hardware switches designed especially
for high performance computing.
A little bit on when to use and when to
choose high performance interconnects
for your high performance computer.
So the idea is that interconnect
selection can actually drastically affect
the performance of your application.
These days often times a gigabit Ethernet
provides pretty good performance.
However there are times when
there is a parallel computing
code that passes lots of messages
from one machine to the other.
And you don't want it to spend
a lot of time communicating
back from machine to machine.
So you need a high performance
interconnect with low latency.
And then there are other times
there is code that has very large
messages that it's trying to pass
from one machine to the next.
And you don't want to saturate the fabric
just by sending messages back and forth.
And of course a combination of the two.
Lots of messages and very large messages.
So those are times to choose a
high performance interconnect.
Interestingly another time that you
want to select a high performance
interconnect is if you are in
a shared computing resource.
So the idea is if you build
a shared compute resource and
you want a variety of users,
a high performance interconnect can often
attract more users to your computer.
And thus offering better
utilization of your resources.
And the reason for that of course is
you have a variety of users out there
with a broad range of requirements.
And you can't predict what each
person is going to require.
So if you can offer a high
performance interconnect you
can make more customers happy.
So let's take a look at what some
of these interconnects are like.
So there's the MirrorNet 2000 components.
This Miracom and MirrorNet are one of
the earliest interconnects out there.
And they are PCIX interfaces.
They include offload engines with memory,
processor and firmware.
And the switches scale
to thousands of nodes.
In fact the majority of the high
performance interconnects on the top 500
lists are currently MirrorNet 2000 based.
The LINQ cables are nice fiber optic
pairs up to 200 meters in length.
And the software stack includes a driver,
interface firmware,
libraries and middleware
to run all of this.
About two months ago,
MirrorNet actually introduced
a new interface card,
the MirrorNet 10G components
for high performance computing.
So this is a newer PCI Express based
10 gigabit Ethernet card from
MirrorCom that offers not just
a 10 gigabit Ethernet capability,
but it also offers the ability
to use it in a high performance,
low latency computing environment.
The switches are standard
gigabit Ethernet switches that
work in conjunction with the
PCI Express Mirror10G cards.
The link cables are either copper
or fiber optic and it also includes
all of the software drivers
required to run it from MirrorCom.
And a third form of interconnect probably
first made famous by Virginia Tech with
their System 10 cluster is InfiniBand.
So the SilverStorm InfiniBand.
InfiniBand is currently
offered in two forms.
Here you see the PCI-X version
and the PCI-Express version.
The main difference being the
PCI-Express offers a dual 4x bandwidth
or much higher bandwidth with
the same latency as the 4x bandwidth.
Switches up to 288 ports in a
single chassis so you can build a
fairly good sized cluster with just
a single large switch and it also
scales up to thousands of nodes.
And the connection on
this is copper based.
And for more information on all
of these and the websites provide
a lot of really good resources.
Miracom, both their Miranet 2000 and
Miranet 10G solutions you can get
information on the miracom.com.
Miracom.com website and InfiniBand
from either SmallTree Communications or
SilverStorm Technologies.
You can check out their websites
for Mac OS X based solutions.
[Transcript missing]
So the first one from
Argonne National Labs,
MPitch 1.2.7 is a current
iteration of this from Argonne.
MPitch 1 is one of the first
MPI middlewares that came out and
there have been spin-outs of that.
There are mirror net enabled MPI stacks,
MPitch GM and MPitch MX.
There's InfiniBand enabled
versions known as MPapitch.
And one of the newest versions
from Argonne is MPitch 2.1,
it's the latest from them.
In addition there are other ones, LAMMPI.
LAMMPI is from Indiana University among
a couple of other labs I believe.
And it provides very good Ethernet
performance as well as mirror net and
InfiniBand support out of the box.
Of note the LAMMPI is
probably the most widely used
MPI stack on Mac OS X clusters
based on its performance.
But one of the newest more
interesting ones is OpenMPI.
It's a joint venture by several of
the national labs and universities
and international labs as well.
It is Xgrid enabled.
You'll see a demonstration on that
from Josh when he comes up in a bit.
It includes not only Ethernet
support but also native mirror
net and InfiniBand support.
So with all of those MPI middlewares
software stacks out there one
of the things we wanted to
look at was well how do these
MPI middlewares perform on Mac OS X.
So one of the things that we
did was we decided to run the
MPI Ping Pong Benchmark on Mac OS X.
The idea here is to measure the
MPI software and fabric performance.
The software itself is designed not
to run on two cores of the same node
but to run on across the fabric.
So from one core to another core
sitting on another compute node.
The message or the ping is sent from
the client to the server process and
the server process bounces back the
message to the client or the Pong.
And that performance time,
the time that it takes to make that
trip is measured from the Pong.
So that's what we did for
our performance benchmark.
In addition you can actually
vary the size of the message or
the ping that you send back and
forth to measure the performance.
Beyond just testing with the
MPI Ping Pong we also decided to see what
that meant for real-world applications.
So we tested the Ping Pong Benchmark
and we also chose a couple of different
real-world software applications
that our customers often run.
So let's take a look at some
of the performance benchmarks.
So as I mentioned there are
various message sizes that
you can pass back and forth.
So here on this chart we have
one byte up to 16 kilobytes.
Latency is measured in
microseconds and shorter is better.
One thing that I did do on this
particular slide is put up a gold
standard benchmark just as a baseline.
So we chose one of the high
performance interconnects and showed
the baseline on the performance
of that with the different messages.
So as we compare that to MPitch
1 over gigabit ethernet you
can see that it does scale.
Similarly to the mirror net but the
latency is about 10 times worse or
an order of magnitude worse than
the high performance interconnect.
But as we switch over to some of the
newer MPI layers we can look at the
performance and what happens there.
So as you see here it's interesting
with the MPitch 2 there's a drastic
improvement over the original MPitch 1.
The latency is almost
significantly better on MPitch
2 or the newer MPI software.
and then LAMMPI.
Better still yet, not significantly,
but it is still a little bit
faster with the message sizes.
So this showed us that any
of the newer stacks seemed to
look better on performance.
So how did this affect
real-world applications?
So one of the applications
we chose to run was GrowMax.
It is a C-based molecular dynamics code.
And in this case we ran a specific number
of processors on XServe G5s and measured
the time for the benchmark performance.
So how long did it take to
run a particular simulation.
In this case you can see we
also ran the high performance
interconnect as a baseline to just
study and look at the scaling.
And then we ran MPitch2,
so one of the newer MPI software
stacks over Gigabit Ethernet.
And it scales fairly similarly
with the MirrorNet just
edging it out a little bit.
But Gigabit Ethernet's
pretty good performance.
And of note you can see that this
particular application scales very
well up to about 24 nodes and it
starts to tend to taper off so that
you might be looking at a plateau in
terms of how many nodes to run per job.
Now let's compare that to MPitch1.
So as you recall the MPitch1 on
the Ping Pong showed very poor
results as message sizes got larger.
And this shows very odd results as well.
It clearly shows MPitch1 results as
not something you want to choose for
running this particular application.
So it gets very slow.
It doesn't scale even after
the first eight nodes.
So just to be sure we decided
to run another application.
This time a Fortran code weather
forecasting simulation benchmark.
And again number of
CPUs and execution time.
So running the simulation,
the baseline high performance
interconnect benchmark.
MPitch2.
So very good scaling on
both of these fabrics.
Again the high performance
interconnect edging out the GIF.
And now if we look at the MPitch1
performance with the same gigabit fabric.
You can see here there are no results
shown for the 8 and 14 CPU benchmarks.
And the reason for that is when
we ran it the scaling would have
pretty much flattened out all
of the other graphs out there.
So we didn't even decide not to even show
those performance benchmarks on this.
on this slide.
So what's that mean?
Basically what we learned from this is
as users of high performace computers you
need to choose your MPI software wisely.
It's not just about hardware selection
and switching fabrics but you need
to choose your MPI software wisely.
What that really means
is don't use MPitch 1.
The exceptions are the specific
fabric designed MPI's MPitch for
MirrorNet or MPitch for InfiniBand.
If you are going to use MPitch strongly
are suggesting that you use MPitch 2.
The performance is much better.
LAMMPI provides excellent performance.
It's a little bit better even than MPitch
2 and again it's compatible with all
the different communications fabrics.
And the latest version OpenMPI and
at the end of the session we'll
have Brian Barrett from the
OpenMPI group come up for Q&A as well.
But excellent alternative to
any of the other MPI softwares.
It runs on Gigabit Ethernet
and also the other fabrics as
I mentioned InfiniBand and MirrorNet.
And what's unique about this is that it
automatically selects the best fabric
to run your application at run time.
So if you have MirrorNet or InfiniBand
enabled it will know that and it
will select that fabric at run time.
And as a bonus it can integrate
with XGrid as a basic job scheduler.
job scheduler,
making setting up a cluster much simpler.
Of note,
I wanted to put this little additional
information here integrating Mac OS X G5
based machines and Intel based machines,
so heterogeneous clusters.
So again, MPitch, it cannot be used on a
heterogeneous G5 and Intel cluster.
Whereas, LAMMPI and OpenMPI can be used
in a mixed cluster environment.
The reason is both LAMMPI and
OpenMPI handle the byte order swapping,
the big Indian, little Indian issues
of the architectures,
whereas MPitch does not.
So the idea to run this mixed environment
is you'll want to compile the MPI layer
for both PowerPC and for Intel.
And you can lipo and build a
universal from that if you wish
and install it on all of the nodes.
And then from there,
make sure that you compile compatible
binaries that are accessible for
each of the architectures and
then just do the MPI run as usual.
So one other thing that I decided
to put up was since I was showing
a lot of performance differences
between the various MPI layers,
I also decided to just show a couple of
slides on gigabit performance versus one
of the high performance interconnects,
in this case, MirrorNet.
As you recall,
we ran the Ping Pong benchmark
and this time I'm just going to
show you the gigabit results,
again, various message sizes and
latency in microseconds.
And the high performance
MirrorNet interconnect,
about an order of magnitude better
for these particular message sizes.
And then we decided to look at it again,
what's it look like on the
real-world applications.
So again,
the weather forecasting model will
show the gigabit results and follow
that up by the MirrorNet results.
In this case, from 8 to 28 CPUs,
they both scale fairly linearly.
So this shows that the high
performance interconnect,
although faster, you might not be able to
justify purchasing a high
performance interconnect.
It looks like here you'd
be better off purchasing,
possibly purchasing more XSERVs,
which would make us happy.
And that way,
it is a large investment to spend
on a high performance interconnect.
So what's it look like when
maybe you actually do need it?
So VASP is another example.
This is another molecular dynamics,
it's a quantum mechanical molecular
dynamics chemistry software package,
a large Fortran code.
And we look at the gigabit Ethernet.
You can see it scales between 6, 8,
and 16 CPUs fairly well,
but there's almost no scaling when
you double the number of CPUs.
And this is with gigabit Ethernet.
But here you can see the
mirror net performance scales
almost perfectly linearly.
So doubling the number of nodes
you get double the performance.
So in this case it does make a
lot of sense to look into adding a
high performance computing fabric.
So what's that mean?
So in summary the high performance
interconnects are usually faster
than gigabit ethernet and when
applications can benefit the performance
gains are usually significant.
So in the case of VASP it was clearly
a significant win to implement
a high performance interconnect.
Though not all applications can justify
the higher performance interconnects.
The first slide with the Wharf
application showed that you're probably
better off just adding more servers.
And then there's other strategies
that you can look to evaluate
whether it's worthwhile to
add the interconnect or not.
But one of the important things
is performing your own tests
with the various interconnects.
That is very valuable in determining
the performance of your applications.
So that's the summary I have on
interconnects and software middleware.
And now I'd like to introduce
the Josh on job scheduling.
Thank you Warner.
So we're going to overview job
schedules a little bit and then go
into some more specific details about
the job schedules that are available
and we'll also do a little Xgrid demo.
So what do job schedulers do?
They basically work with the resource
manager to maximize resource usage.
So if you have a bunch of computers
you want to make sure you effectively
use all of them and none of them are
wasted by just sitting there idle.
They help alleviate the political
issues that are sometimes come
up when you have a cluster.
So let's say you have two teams
both want to run on the cluster.
Well obviously they probably
want to be able to use the
cluster as much as they can.
So this kind of balances
out between the two.
Most resource managers come
with a basic job scheduler.
So most of the times it's
either like round robin or first
in first out sort of thing.
If you have more complex requirements
or more complex requirements
you can use the job scheduler.
So if you have more complex requirements
or more complex requirements
you can use the job scheduler.
more requirements than just that.
There are more complex scheduling.
An example of one of those
complex schedulers is called Mali.
It is free, which is nice.
A lot of people like that,
but it is also very complicated.
Lots of different things
you can do with it.
You can schedule policies,
do different priorities,
reservations and fair share.
So, for example,
if you have a bioinformatics
cluster that's also letting the
physics people get on the computer,
you want to make sure the
bioinformatics people get a higher
priority when they want to run.
So, something like this will help you
kind of balance out things like that.
Resource management is basically
the thing that tracks what
is happening on each node,
makes sure that system loads are correct.
And they are also making sure that
jobs don't exceed their allocated time.
So if someone says, you know,
submits a job for one hour and it's
still running after that one hour,
it's responsible for killing it
and then allocating the resources
appropriately after that.
So some available resource managers and
this list is nowhere near all inclusive.
There's definitely a lot more
than this and I probably missed
someone's favorite resource manager.
But obviously Xgrid
is available in Tiger.
It allows basically distributed
processing of what we call
grid jobs which are a little
bit loosely interconnected
jobs to make work go faster.
I don't know if anyone saw the
podcasting utility that we're doing but
obviously Xgrid is a big part of that
because now you can use Xgrid to do the
podcasting formation and moving it along.
So Tiger Client comes with the Xgrid.
You do need Tiger Server though to
do the controller which basically
brings all those clients together and
lets you allocate resources on them.
There's Grid Engine as well.
They do provide OS X binders
which is really nice.
It is free and open source
so available to anyone.
It is distributed by Sun and
Sun does have I think a commercial
product that Space Health is
so if you need it actually support
you can get that through Sun.
And the great thing about Grid Engine is
it's actively being developed.
It's constantly being updated
and that's really important.
Another one is Torque
which is very popular.
It's actually based off of PBS and
Torque is basically the free
version once it branched off.
And another one is Platform LSF which
is a commercial resource manager.
So we're going to just
focus on a couple of these,
Xgrid and Grid Engine.
- Yeah.
So there's different kinds of
resource management and you
always you don't want to you know
Deploy the one that is going to
be a lot more than what you need.
So the most basic form of
resource management is what we
call social resource management.
Basically you usually have a couple guys,
maybe a few people that can handle
it among themselves who's going to
run when and what just by talking.
So this guy will have nodes 1 through 8,
this guy will have nodes 9 through 16 and
they can usually cooperate pretty nicely.
On top of that we have basic
resource management with round
robin allocation so that the first
job will get the first few nodes,
the next job will get the next few,
so on and so forth.
And Xgrid is an example of that.
So if you need to step up
and start actually looking at
what are each system is doing,
then we can do resource management
with load balancing as well.
So Grid Engine out of
the box can do this.
Now if you need something a
little bit more complex like that,
like what we were talking
about before with reservations,
fair share, dynamic priorities,
then you can basically take MAUI,
the scheduler,
and plug that into something
like Grid Engine and be able to
start doing those sort of things.
So Xgrid.
Xgrid generally is used for serial
applications where you can take
a task and chunk it out into very
loose integrated things and deploy
it across a bunch of systems.
So when Xgrid first came out I didn't
like it because you had to use the
GUI and I was always a command line
sort of person and there's actually a
lot of really good command line support
in Xgrid that I didn't know about.
So for example all you have to do is
set a couple of environment variables
to tell the system where you want to
run on and then you can launch any
job with using the Xgrid command line.
And you can also use this command line
to retrieve the results and delete
the results once the job is done.
And so basically again
what we said before,
Xgrid is round robin.
You do have your,
in this case the Xgrid clients are
on the right there and you can see
that they're working on something.
Now you can actually
integrate Xgrid with MPI.
The OpenMPI team has actually done
a lot of really neat work making
this as seamless as possible.
If anyone's ever done any sort of
MPI integration with a resource
manager it's kind of a little bit
difficult because you have to make
sure that the MPI knows which nodes
it can run on which is dynamic.
You know you don't know beforehand
which nodes you're going to get but
they've done a lot of work integrating
with Xgrid to get that to work.
Same thing as before,
same the two environment variables
and then you can use OpenMPI to run.
There are a couple of requirements
that get that working.
OpenMPI has to be installed
on every single node.
You have to have a shared
workspace where the user nobody
can read and write permissions.
So right now Xgrid is a little bit
more complicated than you might think.
It doesn't run as the current
user who submitted it,
it runs as the user nobody.
So you have to make sure that user can
read and write to that shared workspace.
Set the path so that MPI is
in your path on each system.
And then you submit an
Xgrid MPI job using MPIRUN.
And we're going to try to demo this.
Great, so did a little bit of
cook and show magic here.
We've got Xgrid Admin already running,
deployed.
We have a cluster actually.
This is a cluster over
at the Apple campus.
It's 16 nodes but we've got
four of them on the Xgrid.
So this isn't the cluster
here in the front.
It's actually over at the Apple campus.
So if you haven't seen Xgrid before
we've got the nice little speedometer
that tells you how much work it's doing.
You can see the agents here.
You can see the different
nodes for example that we have.
So we have four nodes.
Yellow isn't bad in this case.
It just means it's not doing
anything at the moment.
So what we're going to do is we are
going to use the command line just
to prove that we can actually use the
command line to submit jobs and we're
going to do an open MPI job GROMACS.
So like we said before we have
to set the environment variables.
And these variables aren't that short
and they're pretty easy to mistype.
Let's see if I get this right.
You can put these in your startup
script or something like that so you
don't have to type this in every time.
So there you can see the two
environment variables are now set.
So we have the application GROMACS and
again this is the cooking show magic.
We already have the NFS deployed,
the shared space,
the setup across all the nodes.
And from here it's simply just using the
OpenMPIRUN command to run the GROMACS.
So we'll do the nice little
gauge here so you can see that.
So once we run it we should see in
the Xgrid admin the jobs actually
start queuing up and running there.
So then I can see the little gauge
is kind of cranking up there.
And we can go to the agents and
now instead of yellow you can
see all the agents are now green.
You can see they all think
they're working on something.
And you can see now here's the
job which wasn't there before.
So this demo takes a
little bit of time to run.
You can actually see now it's getting
the nodes and actually starting to run.
And this is GROMACS.
It does take a while to run so I'm just
going to go and kill it with Control C.
And you can see job disappeared.
Agents think they're available again.
And that's it.
So that was Xgrid from the
command line using OpenMPI.
Again, another resource manager that we
like to talk about is Grid Engine.
It's actually deployed on a lot
of different systems because,
for example, BioTeams Inquiry uses
Grid Engine by default.
So if you ever installed BioTeams
Inquiry you kind of get this for free.
So the pros on it,
it supports a lot of MPI libraries.
All the ones that Warner went
over I definitely know that they
support and you can use those.
It runs on a wide variety of platforms
and these are the officially supported
ones that you can download binaries for
and there's a lot more beyond that that
are probably not officially supported.
But you can definitely download binaries
for OS X and Linux and Solaris and
probably a lot of other Unix operating
systems that you may have to run into.
And like I said before,
active development community.
It's up to version 6 now and
it's a company sponsored project.
It's a company sponsored project.
But definitely a lot of
community development on this.
The con is it's not that easy to set up.
You know, if you ever set up an
X Grid controller it's pretty easy.
You just go out and say, "Hey,
I want to grab these
X Grid clients." And go from there.
With this you have to install
software on each system.
You have to make sure that certain
things are running when you start it up.
And, you know, a little bit more work
required to do that.
And it's all command line based,
of course.
It doesn't require direct
job submission of a binary.
And I'll kind of show you on
the next slide what that is.
On the next slide what's required
to get something running.
And generally it's been my experience
that it requires more maintenance
than something like X Grid.
But, you know,
it's because it's more complex.
you have to make sure that the
daemon is running on each system.
The grid engine daemon.
And make sure that the queues
aren't messed up somehow.
So most of the time it works.
But, you know, it does require a little
bit more maintenance.
So here's an example of a...
How to do some... Summary
of a job with grid engine.
I'm not going to read
out the script there.
But that's what it looks like.
So basically you have to create
a script that we call a wrapper
script that will submit your job.
This is just setting up some environment
variables for Grid Engine and then
basically running it there at the end
using that user local mpish126 line.
So again it's what we were talking
about before though is that this script,
you know,
when you submit it you're not going
to know what machines you're going
to run on so that's why you see
variables there like tempdura machines.
That way when the job gets run it
gets handed by Grid Engine which
nodes it can run on.
And then to run the command it basically
gets qsub and then the script name
and then it gets put in the queue
and then the resource manager and
the job scheduler handle when to run it.
And that's it.
This script did come from
the Bio Team website.
They do a lot of integration
with Grid Engine and OS X.
So if you want to look at
that in a little bit more
detail definitely go there.
And next is the framework.
Frighteningly smart, Yousuf.
Hi, my name is Yusef Abdulghani.
I'm from the Architecture and
Performance team at Apple.
As Apple makes the transition
from PowerPC based systems
to Intel based systems,
we wanted to make sure that we provide
you the right tools to make that
transition easy and also provide you
with tools which can actually give you
better performance and you can use the
underlying architecture to the maximum.
So with that in mind,
I'm going to talk about a few tools that
are available on the Apple platform.
There are several others which
I'm not going to talk about.
These are the Accelerated Framework,
the Intel C++ and Fortran compilers,
the Intel's performance
libraries and Shark.
So let's get started with
the Accelerated Framework.
The Accelerated Framework is
one-stop shopping for your
computational performance.
It comes built in with every copy of
Mac OS X and it is highly optimized
and in some cases hand-tuned to
run on the underlying architecture.
It knows what you are running it
on and then selects the highly
optimized library to actually execute.
It has got several libraries.
The VDSP library is a library
which has got routines for
digital signal processing.
The image contains libraries
for digital image processing.
There is Blast Level 1,
2 and 3 and LA Pack routines.
VForce library,
this is a new library that was introduced
in Tiger and we also have VMathLiv.
So how do you use the
Accelerated Framework?
It's pretty easy.
In your source code, you just do #include
accelerator/accelerator.h and on
the command line for the linker,
you provide the library
using the -wl command.
So what's new with Accelerated
Framework in Leopard?
It is a 64-bit,
it's a four-way FAT binary.
You can create a four-way FAT binary.
So you can create either 32-bit or 64-bit
applications and your applications can
either run on PPC or x86 architecture.
Having said that,
the work on the Accelerated
Framework is not done yet.
We are still optimizing it
for the Intel architecture.
And as we draw closer
to the Leopard release,
you will see much better
performance improvements in
the Accelerated Framework.
The Intel C++ and the
Intel Fortran compilers,
these are one of the best compilers
on the Intel architectures.
They've got support for the
Intel C++ compiler has got
ANSI ISO support or compatibility.
The Fortran compiler supports Fortran 77,
Fortran 90 and Fortran 95 features.
And there are some Fortran 2000
and 2003 features which are also
included in the current version of the
Intel Fortran compiler on Mac OS X.
The Fortran compiler also has
support for common extensions.
Here are some of the key performance
features for the Intel compilers.
Auto vectorization,
this is really important because
you don't want to spend time hand
coding and making use of the vector
engines on the Intel processors.
Auto parallelization,
we'll talk about these
features in a little bit more
detail in the next few slides.
It has got full support for OpenMP and
it is capable of doing whole program
analysis through the inter-procedural,
through the IPO switch.
It has facility to do profile
guided optimization and it has
also certain switches to control
the precision of the floating point
arithmetic on your application.
As you turn on and go to
higher levels of optimization,
a lot of compilers tend to go
away from the IEEE 754 compliance
and give you lower precision.
But if your application is
dependent on the 754 precision
model for floating point,
then you can actually control that and
limit the optimizations which change
the precision of the floating point
arithmetic using some of these switches.
Such as strict, precise, fast, or accept.
So as far as compatibility goes,
the Intel C++ compiler is
source and binary compatible
with the Apple's GCC and G++
compiler for most of the cases.
There's no support for Objective-C,
but it is binary compatible
with the Objective-C objects.
If you want to create universal binaries,
the Intel compiler,
you can do that either
using Xcode or LiPo.
So you want to create a binary
on x86 using the Intel compiler,
but for the PowerPC binary you
might want to use the GCC compiler.
Some note on Xcode integration.
The Intel C++ compiler fully
integrates with Xcode 2.3 or later
and it requires Mac OS X 10.4.4.
The Fortran compiler integration
is a preview release.
The Intel's compiler team is working
with the Xcode team to make that
more streamlined and give full
integration for the Fortran compiler.
There's a 30-day evaluation copy that
you can download from the Intel website,
give it a shot.
And there's also some coupons that
Intel is giving out for 50% discount.
So if you go and want to buy the
compiler you can go downstairs
to the performance lab,
talk to some of the Intel engineers
and they can hand you out that coupon.
So let's talk about some
of the compiler switches.
What are the optimization switches
that Intel compiler provides?
At Dash 01,
this switch actually optimizes
your binary for size.
So if you have got a lot of applications
which you're going to deploy on a server,
you might want to use this switch
because it optimizes for the size.
Dash02, this is the default optimization
level and it optimizes for speed.
So when you turn on this optimization
the compiler actually looks at
your loops and tries to convert,
vectorize,
auto vectorize the loop and use the
SSE or SSE2 or SSE3 instruction set.
As you turn on the
optimization level to -03,
this optimization actually optimizes
your code for data cache and it
does a lot of loop transform.
One thing to be concerned about at this
level is that you might not get the
accurate 754 compliant FP arithmetic.
So you might want to use another
switch to make sure that your
application performs correctly
at this particular switch.
Dash IPO, this instantiates the
interprocedural optimization.
The Intel compiler is capable
of doing whole program analysis.
One caveat with this particular switch is
that your compile time increases a lot.
So if you have a big application with
lots of files and lots of objects,
you will see that the compile time
of your application jumps up a lot.
But because it looks
at the whole program,
it can find out much more optimization,
much more things to do,
and then optimizes your code really well.
The Profile Guided Optimization, the PGO,
is also done and it's also
available for you to use.
You can use it using the
PROFGEN and PROFUSE flags.
This is very useful for branching code,
but one of the problems with this,
and this is like a double-edged sword,
is that the output is going
to be as good as the input.
So if you're using a training
workload for profile guided
optimization and that training
workload is not really representative
of what you're going to run,
then it will give wrong hints to the
compiler and then the resulting binary
that you generate with the profile
guided optimization might give you
regressions in terms of performance.
So you have to use this
optimization carefully.
But if the training workload is
good and it is representative,
you can get really good
results for code which are,
which, which are really good.
branching codes.
Dash Parallel is a new feature that they
have introduced in the Intel compilers.
Most of the products that
Apple ships has at least,
well, have got multiple cores in them.
And Dash Parallel actually takes
the onus on the compiler to
actually parallelize their code.
You don't have to do
anything inside the code.
But again,
I've played with it and sometimes it
works fine and sometimes it doesn't.
So you have to really test it
out and see how good it is for
your particular application.
From HPC's point of view,
because a lot of time people
use MPI to do parallel stuff,
the Dash Parallel switch
is not really useful.
So try it out and see whether it
works for you or not and then gauge
the performance benefit of that.
And finally,
the Intel C++ and Fortran compilers,
they both support the OpenMP standards.
And if you have got OpenMP pragmas
in your application,
you can instantiate and make use
of that using the -OpenMP switch.
So let's talk about the
Intel performance libraries.
Intel ships two types of
performance libraries on Mac OS X.
The Intel MKL and the Intel IPP.
The Intel MKL or the
Math Kernel libraries have
got routines for scientific,
engineering and financial
applications such as BLAST 1,
2 and 3 levels, LAPAC, sparse solvers,
FFTs,
vector math and random number generators.
On the other hand,
the Intel's IPP library
contains image processing,
digital signal processing, cryptography,
video, audio, speech coding and speech
recognition software.
Both these libraries are highly tuned
and optimized for the underlying
Intel chipsets and the chips and
they are also multi-core aware.
So you can control on how many cores
you want these libraries to run and
they can give you better performance.
So when we talk about LAPAC and LINPAC,
so LINPAC numbers,
it's obligatory for us to see.
So what we have here,
I ran LINPAC numbers on a
2.16 GHz Core Duo Processor.
Now this is one of the Apple 17-inch
laptops with 2 GB DDR RAM.
On the X-axis we have got,
we're rating the matrix size from
1000 by 1000 to 12,000 by 12,000.
And on the Y-axis we have
got measurements in M-flops.
So the first curve shows the results
for Intel's MKL using single precision.
So it gives you about 4.2 Giga Flops
on a 2.16 GHz Core Duo Processor.
And this is only using
one core of the processor.
If you run the same benchmark with
Apple's accelerated framework you
get something close to 5 gigaflops.
A pretty good improvement
over the Intel's MKL library.
If you are interested in looking
at double precision you get about
1.4 gigaflops using the Intel's
MKL library and with Apple's accelerated
framework it is pretty much the same.
There's not much performance differences.
So depending on your application and
what kind of primitives do you want to
use you might want to choose accelerated
framework or the Intel's MKL library.
Moving forward,
once you write your application
and you have ported it,
we give you a very nice tool called
a SHARK to actually profile and
identify performance bottleneck.
So what is SHARK?
It's a simple and fast profiling tool.
It identifies performance
problems in your code.
It works with a wide
variety of languages,
C, C++, Fortran,
and any compiler which is actually
capable of generating stabs or dwarf
debug symbols can be used to profile,
can be used with SHARK.
We give you a GUI as well as command
line SHARK and the command line SHARK is
really good for scripting purposes.
Shark is part of Chud Tools.
Chud Tools also have applications
like Big Top and Reggie and Processor
Control Panel which are really useful
tools and the most important part about
Chud is that it's available for free.
So what's new in Shark?
We've spent last year working
with Shark and improving
it in several aspects.
One of the things that we have
done is you can do 64-bit profiling
not only on PowerPC based systems
but also on Intel architecture
or Intel based systems.
We have got UTF-8 support and we have
added the DWARF and DSIM file support
and one of the features is Symbolication.
I'll talk to you about
Symbolication in the later slide.
And finally, Window Time Facility.
Again, I'll explain what that means.
So complete 64-bit support,
the Shark binary itself is
universal and you can also profile
your universal applications.
It shows symbols,
code and leopard frameworks
above the 4GB line.
It has got EM64T support,
you can look at the assembly either
in Intel or AT&T syntax and it has
also got integrated ISA reference.
So for those of us who are not familiar
with the Intel assembly language can
actually learn what those things mean.
So for those of us who are not familiar
with the Intel assembly language can
actually learn what those things mean.
If you have a binary which is
compiled with Dorf information
then you can use it with Shark.
And it works with 32 and 64 bit binaries.
You can mix and match steps and Dorf
information to look up the symbols.
And Shark also provides the DSIM support.
Symbolication,
this was one of the feature
requested by our developers.
A lot of times when you ship your binary
or you strip away the symbols from it,
when it comes to, say,
if it goes to the QA or your user base
and they find any performance issue,
they will actually take a profile
and probably send it back to you.
But the profile that they send back to
you does not have symbol information.
It's all addresses.
So if Shark allows you to actually
reference a symbol rich binary
and then automatically apply
symbol information after the
fact on the profile that you got,
so that now you can see symbol
information in the profile that
you have received which did
not have symbol information.
So that is Symbolication in Shark.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so we're just going to wrap up here
and then we'll have some time for Q&A.
The window time facility has the best
name ever because you know once you're
sitting there running and you want
to know what just happened you can
press the WTF button and then find out,
right?
So anyway,
so for more information about some of
the stuff that we've talked about today,
if you have questions about the stuff
that Yusef was covering you can send some
email to the performance tools group.
Warner and myself both handle
basically cluster pre-sales.
I handle the business side and
Warner handles the education side.
If you're not sure we'd be happy to
direct you to the right people so email
either of us if you're international
or you know research funded and aren't
quite sure where you classify in.
We're friendly, we know each other.
So we'll be happy to get
you to the right person.
If you're new to clusters this was
probably pretty intimidating going
through some of this technical
information but we've got a
couple good resources for you.
These are kind of long URLs but
you can find them on the web.
You can find both of these off of the
just general apple.com/science site which
is kind of a collector site for all of
this but there you'll find two PDFs.
One which is evaluating, acquiring,
and deploying clusters which kind
of is a soup to nuts kind of walk
through of everything that we talked
about today on an even lower level.
And then you also can find the high
performance computing solutions
PDF which is kind of a cookbook
that takes you through the whole
process of setting up a cluster.
Literally at the screenshot level showing
you everything that you would need to do.
and a couple of those
resources I talked about.
There's a couple mailing lists.
The SciTech list and the HPC list.
You can go to lists.apple.com and
find those in the master list there.
Those are both good,
fairly high volume lists.
And then as I said the
apple.com/sciencecollector site gets you
to everything having to do with clusters.
And to end this up,
some related sessions.
We're towards the end of the
conference but there are a
couple more things going on.
There's developing and porting
Unix applications on Mac OS X which
is happening right after this.
And then tomorrow there's develop
and deploy with Xgrid 2 which is
actually right here in this room.
A couple other things, Apple in the lab,
Apple Science Connection are ongoing.
And also if you wanted
to see the new Xserve,
I'm sure there's a few floating around
the conference but one place I know
there's one is down in the IT lab.
That does close at 5 o'clock today.
It's not open tomorrow so if you want
to see it you're going to have to go
now and go see it after this show.